.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-1.1:

************************
What's New in SunPy 1.1?
************************

Overview
========

The SunPy project is pleased to announce the 1.1 release of the sunpy package.

The headline changes in 1.1 are:

* New coordinate frames (#3212)
* Remote Data Manager (#3124)
* SUVI support (#3269 / #3301)
* Initial support for WISPR data (#3501)
* The import times for `sunpy` and some subpackages are significantly shorter, with no loss of functionality.

On this page, you can read about some of the big changes in this release:

* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-python`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-importtime`

SunPy 1.1 also includes a large number of smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the :ref:`changelog`.

By the numbers:

* XX commits have been added since 1.0
* XX issues have been closed since 1.0
* XX pull requests have been merged since 1.0
* XX people have contributed since 1.0
* XX new contributors

.. _whatsnew-1.1-python:

Supported versions of Python
============================

SunPy 1.1 comes with support for Python versions 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-coordinates:

Improvements to coordinates functionality
=========================================

.. _whatsnew-1.1-dl_manager:

Manager for Versioned Data Files
================================


.. _whatsnew-1.1-SUVI:

Support for SUVI Data
=====================


.. _whatsnew-1.1-WISPR:

Initial Support for WISPR Images
================================

Following the first data release from Parker Solar Probe, SunPy 1.1 supports loading WISPR imaging data into a `~sunpy.map.GenericMap`.
Due to the complex projections in the WISPR data this involved changing the way sunpy converts FITS headers into `astropy.wcs.WCS` objects.
It is expected that sunpy 2.0 will include more complete support for WISPR and other PSP data. 

.. _whatsnew-1.1-importtime:

Speeding up import times
========================

We know that the initial import of `sunpy` or its subpackages can feel like it takes a long time, particularly on slower machines.
Some of that import time can be the result of importing other modules or external packages that are required for specialized functionality that a user may not ever actually use.
We have identified the most egregious cases and deferred those imports of dependencies to when they are actually needed.
For example. the initial import of `sunpy.map` was sped up by ~40%(!), with no loss of functionality.
We will continue to look for ways to improve our import times.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-renamed-removed:

Notable Breaking Changes or Removed functionality
=================================================

This is just some of the renamed or removed functionality.


Full Change Log
===============

To see a detailed list of all changes in version v1.1, including changes in API, please see the :ref:`changelog`.
