.. _whatsnew-6.0:

************************
What's New in sunpy 6.0?
************************

The SunPy Project is pleased to announce the 6.0 release of the ``sunpy`` core package.

On this page, you can read about some of the big changes in this release.

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 1

``sunpy`` 6.0 also includes a large number of smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the :ref:`changelog`.

This release of ``sunpy`` contains 795 commits in 177 merged pull requests closing 67 issues from 34 people, 16 of which are first-time contributors to ``sunpy``.

* 795 commits have been added since 5.1
* 67 issues have been closed since 5.1
* 177 pull requests have been merged since 5.1
* 34 people have contributed since 5.1
* 16 of which are new contributors

The people who have contributed to the code for this release are:

-  Ahmed Hossam  *
-  Alasdair Wilson
-  Albert Y. Shih
-  Aniket Mishra  *
-  Ansh Dixit
-  Aritra Sinha
-  Ashish Bastola  *
-  Benjamin Mampaey
-  Brett J Graham
-  Chris R. Gilly  *
-  Clément Robert  *
-  Daniel F. Ryan
-  Daniel Garcia Briseno
-  David Stansby
-  Ghaith Kdimati  *
-  Jayraj Dulange  *
-  Laura Hayes
-  Manit Singh  *
-  Mubin Manasia  *
-  Nabil Freij
-  Piyush Sharma  *
-  Rehan Chalana  *
-  Samuel Bennett
-  Samuel J. Van Kooten
-  Shane Maloney
-  Sijie Yu  *
-  Sirjan Hansda  *
-  Stuart J. Mumford
-  Will Barnes
-  Yash Malik  *
-  Zach Burnett  *
-  dependabot[bot]
-  graham  *
-  pre-commit-ci[bot]

Updates to minimum dependencies
===============================

The minimum required version of Python has been updated to 3.10.

The minimum required versions of core dependencies have been updated:

- astropy >= 5.3.0
- numpy >= 1.23.5
- packaging >= 23.0

The minimum required versions of these optional dependencies has also been updated:

- asdf >= 2.13.0
- asdf-astropy >= 0.4.0
- beautifulsoup4 >= 4.11.0
- cdflib >= 0.4.4
- dask >= 2022.5.2
- glymur >= 0.11.0
- h5netcdf >= 1.0.0
- h5py >= 3.7.0
- lxml >= 4.9.0
- opencv-python >= 4.6.0.66
- pandas >= 1.4.0
- python-dateutil >= 2.8.1
- reproject >= 0.9.0
- requests >= 2.28
- scikit-image >= 0.19.0
- scipy >= 1.9.0
- spiceypy >= 5.0.0
- tqdm >= 4.64.0
- zeep >= 4.1.0

Overhaul of optional dependencies
=================================

The optional dependencies have been overhauled to make it easier to install ``sunpy`` with only the dependencies you need.
The following extra group have been added:

- "core" (``pip install "sunpy[core]"``) - installs only the dependencies that are required to import ``sunpy`` or any of its sub-packages.
- "scikit-image" (``pip install "sunpy[scikit-image]"``) - installs the ``scikit-image`` package used for image processing.
  This dependency is no longer included in the "image" extra group.

Additionally, the "all" (``pip install "sunpy[all]"``) install group is now a meta group that includes all optional dependencies.
The "dask" group has also been removed.

Decoupling dates in `~sunpy.map.Map`
====================================
Previously, `~sunpy.map.Map` used the single `~sunpy.map.GenericMap.date` property to serve two, potentially conflicting purposes: the "canonical" observation time and the reference time for the coordinate system.
In order to properly support map sources where those two times are not the same, there is a new `~sunpy.map.GenericMap.reference_date` property to serve as the reference time for the coordinate system.
`~sunpy.map.GenericMap.date` continues to serve as the canonical observation time, which is commonly the start of the observation period.
See the documentation for the respective properties for the logic of parsing the metadata.

An example of a user-facing impact is that, for certain map sources, the time used by the `~sunpy.map.GenericMap.coordinate_frame` and `~sunpy.map.GenericMap.observer_coordinate` properties can be different from the time printed in the default title of plots.

Support for ADvanced Adaptive Prediction Technique (ADAPT) data
===============================================================

A new map source has been added (`sunpy.map.sources.ADAPTMap`) to support the ADAPT data files.
In addition, a new client (`sunpy.net.dataretriever.ADAPTClient`) has been added to search and download ADAPT files.

Please note that there are several data arrays within the ADAPT FITS files and `~sunpy.map.Map` will, by default, try to read them all and fail.
In these cases, you must specify the header-data Pair you want to read.
For these data, it will always be the first one.
You can specify this by passing the ``hdus`` keyword argument to `~sunpy.map.Map`,

.. code-block:: python

    >>> sunpy.map.Map("adapt40311_03k012_202401020800_i00005600n1.fts.gz", hdus=0)  # doctest: +SKIP

New `~sunpy.coordinates.PlanarScreen` context manager
=====================================================

`~sunpy.coordinates.PlanarScreen` provides a context manager for interpreting 2D coordinates as being on the inside of a planar screen.
The plane goes through Sun center (or some specified distance from Sun center) and is perpendicular to the vector between the specified vantage point and Sun center.
This replaces the default assumption where 2D coordinates are mapped onto the surface of the Sun and is an alternative to `~sunpy.coordinates.SphericalScreen`.

Method to compute the rotation matrix between two SPICE frames
==============================================================

A new function `~sunpy.coordinates.spice.get_rotation_matrix` has been implemented to compute the rotation matrix between two SPICE frames.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from sunpy.coordinates.spice import get_rotation_matrix
    >>> import astropy.units as u

    >>> source_frame = "J2000"
    >>> target_frame = "Galactic"
    >>> from_time = '2001-01-01T00:00:00'
    >>> rotation_matrix = get_rotation_matrix(source_frame, target_frame, from_time)
    >>> rotation_matrix
    array([[-0.05487554, -0.8734371 , -0.48383499],
           [ 0.49410945, -0.44482959,  0.74698225],
           [-0.86766614, -0.19807639,  0.45598379]])
    >>> vec_components = [1, 0, 0] * u.T
    >>> transformed_matrix = rotation_matrix @ vec_components
    >>> transformed_matrix
    <Quantity [-0.05487554,  0.49410945, -0.86766614] T>

Fix filename sanitization for downloaded files from the VSO
===========================================================

The `.VSOClient` has been sanitizing filenames to ensure that they are valid on all platforms.
However, we have now fixed the sanitization to be more conservative, to follow the NFKC Unicode normalization, which is the recommended normalization for filenames on most platforms.
This now does not replace periods, does not change letter case and does not leave Unicode characters decomposed.
One example is that the letter "ä" will now be preserved in the filename.
Another example is that the filename "aia.lev1.171A_2020_06_07T06_33_09.35Z.image_lev1.fits" will be preserved instead of being replaced with "aia_lev1_171a_2020_06_07t06_33_09_35z_image_lev1.fits".

.. warning::

    This will most likely force a redownload of files from several data providers.

Deprecate `~sunpy.coordinates.Helioprojective.assume_spherical_screen`
======================================================================

:meth:`~sunpy.coordinates.Helioprojective.assume_spherical_screen` is now deprecated.
Equivalent functionality is now provided by :class:`~sunpy.coordinates.SphericalScreen`.

Removal of ``sunpy.net.helioviewer.HelioViewerClient``
======================================================

``sunpy.net.helioviewer`` has been deprecated since sunpy v4.1 and has now been removed.
Users should instead use the `hvpy <https://hvpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ package.
This package provides a Python wrapper around the Helioviewer API and is maintained by the Helioviewer Project.
The ``hvpy`` package supersedes the ``sunpy.net.helioviewer`` module.

Removal of ``sunpy.database``
=============================

The ``sunpy.database`` module has not been actively maintained for over a year now and has a number of outstanding issues.
It has been deprecated since sunpy 4.1, and since there have been no major objections from the community since then we have completely removed ``sunpy.database`` in sunpy 6.0.
If you are interested in seeing a replacement for ``sunpy.database``, either inside ``sunpy`` or as a third-party package, please join the discussion thread at https://community.openastronomy.org/t/deprecating-sunpy-database/495.
