.. _whatsnew-7.0:

************************
What's New in sunpy 7.0?
************************

The SunPy Project is pleased to announce the 7.0 release of the ``sunpy`` core package.

On this page, you can read about some of the big changes in this release.

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 1

``sunpy`` 7.0 also includes a large number of smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the :ref:`changelog`.

This release of sunpy contains X commits in X merged pull requests closing X issues from X people, X of which are first-time contributors to sunpy.

* X commits have been added since 6.1
* X issues have been closed since 6.1
* X pull requests have been merged since 6.1
* X people have contributed since 6.1
* X of which are new contributors

The people who have contributed to the code for this release are:

- TBA

Where a * indicates that this release contains their first contribution to sunpy.

Updates to minimum dependencies
===============================

The minimum required versions of the following packages have been updated:

- python>=3.11

Enhancements to plotting maps with autoalignment
================================================

The autoalignment functionality of the `~sunpy.map.Map` method :meth:`~sunpy.map.GenericMap.plot` has been significantly enhanced.
Autoalignment is useful for plotting a map on coordinate axes that may be in a different projection or even a different coordinate frame, while preserving the appearance of the original map's pixels.
The previously available mesh-based approach (``autoalign='mesh'``) draws each map pixel individually, and has been sped up dramatically.
The newly available image-based approach (``autoalign='image'``) draws a warped version of the map as a single image, which is usually faster than the image-based approach, but has some limitations.
Finally, there is an automatic setting (``autoalign=True``), which makes a determination of whether to use the mesh-based approach or the image-based approach.

This autoalignment functionality is for visualization purposes.
For other data-analysis needs, such as co-adding images, reprojecting the map using :meth:`~sunpy.map.GenericMap.reproject_to` may be more appropriate.

Access to the JSOC AIA "synoptic" data
======================================

There is now a FIDO client which will allow someone to download the "synoptic" AIA data from the JSOC.
This dataset is not synoptic like HMI and MDI Synoptic images which are images of the solar surface reconstructed from many observations over a solar rotation but rather a synopsis of AIA data.
The AIA synoptic data are calibrated Level 1.5 images with reduced 1k x 1k resolution at regular 2-minute cadence.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from sunpy.net import Fido, attrs as a
    >>> results = Fido.search(a.Time("2016/1/1", "2016/1/1 00:01:00"),
    ...                       a.Instrument.aia, a.Level("1.5s"))  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA
    >>> results  # doctest: +REMOTE_DATA
    <sunpy.net.fido_factory.UnifiedResponse object at ...>
    Results from 1 Provider:
    <BLANKLINE>
    9 Results from the AIASynopsisClient:
    Source: https://jsoc1.stanford.edu/data/aia/synoptic/
    <BLANKLINE>
           Start Time               End Time        Instrument  Physobs  Source Provider Level Wavelength
    ----------------------- ----------------------- ---------- --------- ------ -------- ----- ----------
    2016-01-01 00:00:00.000 2016-01-01 00:00:59.999        AIA intensity    SDO     JSOC  1.5S         94
    2016-01-01 00:00:00.000 2016-01-01 00:00:59.999        AIA intensity    SDO     JSOC  1.5S        131
    2016-01-01 00:00:00.000 2016-01-01 00:00:59.999        AIA intensity    SDO     JSOC  1.5S        171
    2016-01-01 00:00:00.000 2016-01-01 00:00:59.999        AIA intensity    SDO     JSOC  1.5S        193
    2016-01-01 00:00:00.000 2016-01-01 00:00:59.999        AIA intensity    SDO     JSOC  1.5S        211
    2016-01-01 00:00:00.000 2016-01-01 00:00:59.999        AIA intensity    SDO     JSOC  1.5S        304
    2016-01-01 00:00:00.000 2016-01-01 00:00:59.999        AIA intensity    SDO     JSOC  1.5S        335
    2016-01-01 00:00:00.000 2016-01-01 00:00:59.999        AIA intensity    SDO     JSOC  1.5S       1600
    2016-01-01 00:00:00.000 2016-01-01 00:00:59.999        AIA intensity    SDO     JSOC  1.5S       4500
    <BLANKLINE>
    <BLANKLINE>
